Lesson 1
INTRODUCTION TO E-COMMERCE
1.1 INTRODUCTION
In the past few years, enterprises across the globe have experienced significant changes in their business information system. Huge investments were made in enterprise resource planning system implementations but still they struggle to get timely information that is needed to make effective business decision and to ensure continuous growth of enterprises. Placing "e" in front of any process or function seemed to be the magic prescription for never ending story of success and rapid returns for enterprises. E-business, e-procurement, e-sales, e-payment, e-banking, e-CRM, e-CAD, e-delivery are just a few. Internet, for example is becoming one of the most popular medium in transmitting various data. Users can find any kind of information within a shorter time compared with conventional method that consumes more time.
The emergence of the Internet throughout the world has been contributing such a variety medium in doing business as well as people lifestyle. In fact, Internet is the essential prerequisite for the existence of E-commerce. Electronic commerce or e-commerce has been defined as the ability to perform transactions involving the exchange of goods or services between two or more parties using electronic tools and technique. The explosion of E-commerce has created new phenomena in our lifestyle especially in shopping activities. Consumers can easily buy products or services like magazines and airlines tickets via Internet.
1.2 DEFINITION
The word commerce is the basic concept for electronic commerce, pertaining to buying and selling of goods while 
'commercial' denotes business practice and activities intended to make profits. 
Electronic commerce, like any other business, deals with the exchange of money for soft or hard goods and
services.Kalakota and Whintons in 1997 defined the term E-commerce from different perspectives. These
perspectives are:
Communication
• Business Process
• Service
• Online
Communication Perspective: According to this perspective, E-commerce is the delivery of information, product/services or payments 
over telecommunication channels, computer networks or any other electronic mode of communication. 
Business Process Perspective: This says that E-commerce is the application of technology towards the automation of business transactions and work flow. 
Service Perspective: E-commerce is defined as a tool that addresses the desire of firms, consumers and management to cut service cost while improving 
the quality of goods/services and increasing the speed of service delivery.
Online Perspective: E-commerce provides the capability of buying and selling products and information on the internet and other online services.


The term commerce is treated as transaction between business partners. Therefore, the term e- commerce seems to fairly narrow to people. Thus some time we use the term e-business. It is a broader definition of e-commerce. There is confusion among the consultants and the academicians over the use of this term. Some think that e-commerce encompasses all world of electronically based organizational
1